The format is that you're going to ask me questions
and I'll go on talking as long as I think it
worthwhile. That's right. And if you think I've
said too much, just stop me. And if you think I'm
missing anything in asking questions, just
interject something. Yes, sure. OK. All right.
Now, was the study of geophysics accidental due to
a need for a job in the Depression or a long-time
interest of yours? I started life as a physicist in
Cambridge. and I did the ordinary undergraduate
course in physics, and I was determined to be a
physicist. And this was an ambition which I'd had
since I was first a teenager, since the age of 12 or
14. I think it first started probably earlier than
that. I thought I'd be an engineer, and then I
learned what the world was like, and I decided to be
a physicist. And I was, from the first really, a
serious professional physicist. in the
Cambridge tradition of experimental physics.
And then I started to do research in 1929, which is
not the best time in the world to start. I started on
a PhD and I was going along and I was working on the
scattering of electrons in gases. That's quite
irrelevant to your topic, but this came out very
well and rather quickly.
Things were going well, Rutherford seemed
pleased, he wasn't frightfully interested in
this particular project. My supervisor was
Patrick Blackett,
who comes in later in the story again. And then one
day I was having tea in the Cavendish, and a man came
up to me and said, do you want a job in Geodesy? And I
said, I think I probably do, what's Geodesy? This
was Norman Feather, I think, who was recently
retired as professor of physics in Edinburgh. A
very bright young man who never really came to all
that. Well, anyway, he'd been offered the job and
he decided he didn't want it. And I went to see
Rutherford. And Rutherford said, look, there are
an awful lot of people just in front of you. And I
think, and there are no jobs at all. If I were you,
I'd take any job I could get. And so I went off and saw
the man who was teaching surveying actually, a man
called Sir Gerald Lance Cunningham. He had been in
the British Army in India as a surveyor. He'd spent
his life, he was a man then, I forget how old he was, I
wrote a biography of him actually, and he was
probably sixty. He'd been a surveyor in India and
then come back to Cambridge to teach surveying. I
think I needn't go into this because, as I say, I've
written a biography of him in the Royal Society's
biographical notices. And he seemed a rather nice
sort of man, quite uninstructed, obviously
didn't know anything about anything. He was a
soldier and so on. Ended up as a colonel, I think,
which isn't a very elevated rank. I thought I'd
give it a try. So I took this job, and I dickered with
him a bit, and I got him to pay me 350 pounds a year,
which was very good pay in those days. I've never
felt so well off as I did in this job. I had 350 as a
salary, I had 150 by miscellaneous coaching and
teaching and helping in labs and things. And I had
about 100 pounds of my own, and I had something like
600 pounds altogether. And I've never been so well
off. We had help in the house. We had everything. We
went skiing in the winter in Switzerland, and we
went to Austria in the summer. And I got married,
and everything was fine. And if you work it out with
the inflation and the changes in taxes and so on,
you'll find I was, in fact, better off than I've
ever been since, until I came here. Anyway, I took
this job, and a day or two later, I met Rutherford.
Rutherford, of course, was the great father
figure of physics at this time, a man with a
wonderful instinct. Someone said of him, the
alpha particles were his friends. He knew what
they'd do. Well, he met me in the street, and he
said, how are you getting on? I said, all right. He
said, well, but how are you getting on with this man
that's cunning him? And I said, I'm getting on very
well. He's a nice man. He said, yes. I know he's a
nice man. He's not very inspiring, is he? And I
said, no, you couldn't call him that. He said,
well, never your mind. If you want anything, just
come and see me. He knew his, he was a modest man in a
way, but he knew his position in the scheme of
things. Well, anyway, that's how I got out of
physics and into geophysics. And there was no
money at all. In one year during this period, our
department had no money other than they could pay
my salary. Lennox Cunningham they didn't pay, he
was paid by Trinity College and we had no money at
all. And I went out and got contracts to do things
for various firms and we got along and started
serious work. And looking back I'm surprised how
much we got done between 1931 when I joined this
enterprise and 1939 when war broke out. That was
eight years. And we started off, of necessity,
doing what we were able to do, what we had equipment
for. Ernest Cunningham had designed and
constructed a pendulum apparatus for measuring
gravity. And I took this up and the first thing I did
was to make the thing work. He'd never succeeded in
getting it to work. And so we got the thing to work.
And essentially my PhD thesis was in two halves.
The first half was on the scattering of solar
electrons and gases. Looking back, I was reading
it the other day and I thought it was an admirable
thesis. about a topic which was very important at
the time. Quantum mechanics was essentially
invented in the middle 20s and I started on this
work in 29 and we showed that quantum mechanics
could account for the processes of scattering and
this was one of the things that the old quantum
theory of Bohr couldn't do. So very early on I got
serious scientific results and a little bit of a
reputation. Well, then the second half of the
thesis consisted of an account of how to measure
gravity with pendulums. And in between, there was
a piece on the theory of the scattering of
neutrons. I suddenly became interested in
quantum mechanical scattering theory. And then
there was an appendix on a machine for solving
differential equations. Well, if never, no
university in the world would accept a thesis
today with a sort of ragbag of things. My examiners
were Chadwick, the discoverer of the neutron, and
Patrick Blackett, who was my supervisor. Look,
I'm going into much too much detail of the part
before I became an oceanographer. No, but no. Do
you like this? Yes, I have all kinds of questions
here to ask you about this that you're just
answering as you go along. As you can see, I'm
marking them off. Shall I go on like this? You bet.
Well, I remember the Ph.D., oral very well. In
Cambridge, just the two examiners and the
candidate go to the oral. And I went in, and the
first thing Chandwick said was, you see that thing
over by the door? What is it? And I said, well, I
don't know. It's kept that door open ever since I
can remember. It was a big lump, some big lump of
iron, some sort of machine. Oh, he said, you won't
know what that is. That's the machine which
Wollaston made in 1812 for making Wollaston wire.
Whether it was true or not, I don't know how he knew.
And then Blackett said, do you read the Times this
morning? And I said no. And he said, well, there's a
letter in it about the distances of stars. How do
you find the distances of stars? And it still
happens. I talked about this, so I've stopped. And
in all these sorts of examination interviews for
jobs and things, I always believe in going on
talking until someone stops you. Because as long
as they listen to you, and they're talking about
something you know about, obviously you're doing
all right. And you reduce the time they've got to
ask you questions you don't know about. Well, then
Blackett said, what good do you think your work is?
And I talked about that, and that was the end of my
PhD all. So this was very satisfactory. Well then,
I started to branch out a bit. We got some money, and
I went to East Africa. with my wife and travelled
all over the places you couldn't go now, all over
Kenya and Uganda, south part of the Sudan, round
into the Ture Forest in the Congo, down to the west
of Rwenzori, back into Uganda and through Uganda
again and Kenya and down into Tanzania and down to
the coast and then up the coast to Malindi.
measuring gravity a great adventure one of the
sort of formative things in my life that first gave
me the idea that I could do what I wanted to do and all
this time I was getting rather dubious telegrams
and letters from Dennis Cunningham who had
various objections to the way the work was being
done it involved him doing something in Cambridge
making some measurements in Cambridge and me
making measurements in Africa and he became sort
of disenchanted with the project, didn't believe
it was going to work out. But I was pretty sure it was
all right. And when I got back, it was all right. And
then someone told me that when you're a young man,
you should write a very long paper. Because then,
no one will read it, but whatever you do
afterwards, people will say, very sound man, you
know, he wrote that long paper. So I settled down,
and I wrote the longest paper that had been
published in the Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society in this century. And it stayed
the longest until after the war when there was a
friend of mine who wrote a paper on the internal
ballistics of rockets that was longer. So that I
then become, this is the prestigious journal in
England, rather stuffy, large sized pages, and
this had coloured maps everywhere.
I was a slightly erratic character who might well
be accused of getting things wrong and rushing
into print and so on, but the best thing to do was to
have something at any rate people would say, yes
this was a sound piece of work. Well then I felt we
had to branch out and I took up seismic work on land.
This was the time when seismology with explosions
was just coming And it was something of a mystery.
The oil industry weren't saying very much, and in
fact, weren't doing it very well. And we started
from scratch. With a number of graduate students,
I mean usually only one at a time, because I never
had more than one graduate student at a time at this
time, through a number of years, four or five
years, we worked on the depth of the old rocks under
East England. In East England you've got old rocks
a few hundred feet down, a thousand feet down,
overlaid by clays and chalk and such things, and we
were mapping this old land surface now bedded
under East England. It was, we bit off more than we
could chew, rather, but we couldn't quite
acknowledge that, and we kept at it. And I really
learned about seismology because, as I say, we
were starting more or less from scratch. We wrote
another very large paper on this. And then, at the,
you, what would you take me? Sir? Do you want to put a
new tape in? No, no. Well, at the International
Union of Geologists and Geophysics in Edinburgh
in 1936, this was about five years after I started
in geophysics, I met Dick Field. Dick Field is one
of the most influential geologists of the
century. He was at Princeton. He never did very
much scientific work, really. He never published
very many papers. He was a curious man, extremely
eccentric, extremely uninhibited. He was the
most frightful nuisance. He wouldn't stop
talking. He wouldn't take no for an answer. He went
on and on. And he started going on and on about the
importance of doing something about the geology
of the oceans. Well, we were already doing
something about gravity measurement at sea.
There was a man called Vaning Minus, a wonderful
man at Dutchman, who devised a method of using
pendulums in a submarine for measuring gravity at
sea. And Minus had come over, and we'd made
arrangements to borrow his apparatus. And a
colleague of mine, a young man, had joined us. He
wasn't a graduate student because he didn't think
it suitable for a gentleman to take a PhD. There was
a strong feeling at that time in Cambridge that a
gentleman didn't take a PhD. In fact, you don't
want the history of the PhD in Cambridge. It's a
very curious story. Yes. As a matter of fact, I was
going to ask you what was life like as a student at
Cambridge 45 years ago. Well, let me tell you about
that.
The PhD, of course, was invented in Germany as a
second degree, after you got your first degree.
And they didn't have one in Cambridge. But a
considerable number of people started to come
from various countries in the empire,
particularly Canada, Australia, New Zealand, to
turn up in Cambridge. And it was obviously
desirable that they should have something to show
for it, some certificate or other. So they took up
the German idea of having a PhD, and four, these
people with a Cambridge degree were not eligible.
The argument was that if you had a Cambridge BA, why
should you want a PhD? And after all, you'd get an MA
by paying five pounds. In Cambridge, if you have a
BA, after three years, you can pay five pounds and
get an MA. And you don't have to stay in Cambridge.
You can go away and get a job somewhere and just send
in your five pounds and you get your MA. And as far as
I know, that's all so. Well, anyway, so there was a
PhD for people from abroad. And Rutherford was the
first man to get it in, I think, 1896 or
thereabouts. So they started with a bank. And this
became a very popular thing. And after the war,
there was a feeling that people from Cambridge
should also be able to take it. And in fact,
Chadwick was persuaded to take it to give some
prestige to the degree. Chadwick came to
Cambridge just after the war. He had, I think, a
Cambridge degree already. He'd been imprisoned
in Germany during the war. He was a He was in
Germany, having just taken his degree before the
war, and was shut up in Ruhleben, I think it was, a
camp he was interned in Ruhleben. And he met there a
number of other people, including Charlie Ellis,
who became a famous physicist in Cambridge. And
Shantwick ran a course in physics in this Ruhleben
camp. the wall. After the war he came back and he was
asked if he would take the PhD in order to give some
prestige to it from the point of view of Englishmen
taking it. Well right up to the middle 30s there was
quite a strong feeling that it was slightly not the
thing for a man with a Cambridge degree to take a
PhD. Blackett never took a PhD. This man, BC Brown,
who took up gravity measuring in submarines,
never took a PhD. A number of people didn't. I went
against this. I said, I am going to have all the
qualifications I can get, because I don't know
what's going to happen in the future. And I may need
them for some reason, and they can't do me any harm.
After all, I don't have to call myself Dr. Bullard.
I can just keep it in the background. Well, anyway,
if you asked me just now, say something about what
it was like to be a student in Cambridge. Well, so I
should go back, I think, to my first arrival in
Cambridge. You'll find some account of this in
that piece I wrote about Rutherford. which I gave
you. I wrote in Nature last year a piece about
Rutherford's Cambridge. I was asked to write a
light-hearted piece. Nature has one issue a year
which isn't so serious-minded at the time of the
British Association for the Advancement of
Science, and I wrote a piece about the Cavendish.
Well, in Cambridge, you had to take four
scientific subjects for your first two years. And
I took physics, maths, mineralogy, and
chemistry. And so I was only giving a rather small
part of my time to physics. And these first two
years were something of a disappointment. The
lectures were moderately good. People were
obviously preoccupied with their own research
and so on, and they were a little superficial. And I
remember in my third year coming out of a lecture by
Aston, the inventor of the mass spectrograph. He
was lecturing on mass spectroscopy. And I met
Blackett in the corridor. He's a man 10 years older
than me, already a very distinguished physicist.
He said, what are you doing? I said, I've been
listening to old Aston. He said, well, Aston, you
do that for us. It's all in his book. And suddenly it
came to me with a blinding flash that this was true
of all the lecturers. So I stopped going to
lectures altogether in my third year. There was no
compulsion to go. And the examinations were not on
the lectures. The examinations were on physics
and were set largely by people from outside
Cambridge, so they had no necessary relation to
the lectures. So there was no great advantage in
going to the lectures. So I continued to go to
Rutherford's lectures, of course they were fun.
You never knew what he'd say next. He had this
wonderful intuitive understanding of physics
and this pose of not knowing anything about
theoretical physics. In fact, although he wasn't
a mathematician, he was rather shrewd about
physics and he had this wonderful intuition of how
things would work and he'd say the most outrageous
things. I think probably intentionally. I
remember once him saying, integral y dx, dx is
small, we'll ignore this, that kind of thing. And
somehow or other the answer always came out right
in the end. There's a story that In one of his early
papers, I don't know if this is true, he was
measuring the charge on the alpha particle, and it
came out as 3.4. And he said, we'll take the nearest
integer, which is 4, because he knew by some
obscure internal intuition that this was the
right answer. Well, anyway, he was the most
wonderful man, and I got to know him when I started
to do research. He was a predictable man in some
cases. Sometimes he'd come in and he'd be as nice as
anything, and then suddenly when he'd come in in a
bad temper, he'd have to work it off from the first
man he met. There was a man called Roberts, who was I
suppose ten years older than me, working in the
same room, and he came in one day, apparently very
good humour, rubbing his hands, and said, The time
has come to consider whether your experiments are
worth the liquid air they consume. And Paul
Roberts, who was a shy and retiring man with an
enormous admiration of Rutherford, was
absolutely shattered by this. Another day, he
came in, and I had asked the head lab man to move an
induction heater downstairs because I wanted to
use it. And the lab man had complained to
Rutherford that people were wanting this thing
moved up and down stairs. Rutherford, as his usual
way, he didn't put up a notice or anything, he just
came around and attacked some individual, which
is a very effective way, you see, of preventing
people doing things. He started talking to me
about it, and he worked himself up gradually by
saying when he was young there hadn't been such
things and no one used them, and so on and so forth.
And finally he said, I never want to see you in the
lab again. Which is a little high, I thought, on a
graduate student in his second year. So Oliphant
came to defend me, and Oliphant got told off for
some quite other thing. And then he went round and
he found Cockroft, the inventor of artificial
disintegration, who designed the machine. He
told him off for not making it in two parts, that it
would be carried downstairs. And that evening I
heard he was dining in Trinity, and He met the man,
or he thought he'd met the man, who invented
induction heaters from General Electric. And he
said to him, he said, do you let your young men have
these machines carried up and downstairs all the
time? And the other man said, no, we have one on each
floor. Well, anyway, I arranged next morning to
get in a little early, because Motherford always
arrived on the dot of nine. And I met him at the door
and walked upstairs with him. And there must have
been some feeling that he'd said something
unsuitable because he was so nice to me and, you
know, really friendly. And it was really the first
time I really got to know him. I mean, I was entirely
aware that he didn't really intend to throw me out
of the room. It was a very curious set-up. There was
no equipment at all, practically. You made
everything yourself. You did your own
glassblowing. Great difficulty in getting any
kind of equipment. Rutherford was a farmer's boy.
At least, he was a farmer's boy, a small farm in New
Zealand. And he regarded himself as a farmer's boy
who had somehow fallen into a corrupt society. And
this gave him the right to be rude to people. He was
really extraordinarily rude to a great number of
people. But no one minded. He sort of went booming
on. And obviously, he didn't feel he was being
rude. One day, the master of Corpus Christi
College, which was across a little alleyway from
the lab, complained about the noise that was being
made in the lab by a piece of equipment. And
Rutherford was telling this story. He said, I told
him if he didn't like the noise, he shouldn't have
built the college there. The college, of course,
was built in the 15th century or something, this
guy. Well, the kind of atmosphere was this rather
tough atmosphere, tremendously competitive, of
course, because this was clearly the best school
of physics in the world. This was the great centre
of physics, where nuclear physics was invented.
So the result was you got tremendously bright
students, And the tremendously competitive
atmosphere, very few jobs about. I remember Lord
Bowden telling me, who was principal of the
Manchester College of Technology. He was made a
lord for some obscure reason by Mr. Wilson, who I
suppose threw him out. Mr. Wilson used to make
people lords either when he owed them money or when
he threw them out of his government. Anyway, Bogle
said, you know, it took me years to realise that the
fact I wasn't as bright as these people didn't mean
I had a low IQ, that this was a selective group.
Well, anyway, I got out of this And everyone
sympathized with me. People came around and said,
well, a terrible thing that you have to leave
physics and go into this backwater. And it's one of
the curious and critical things in my life that I
did get out of this intensely competitive atomic
physics, nuclear physics that was just growing. I
thought of it as a disaster at the time. But at the
same time, I knew I was moving into something that
might well suit me better. I described this, I
think, in the Ewing piece, the piece I wrote about
Ewing. I think I was really writing about myself.
It was in a speech. It's not in, I think, in the
biography of Ewing. I wrote it in a speech I gave in
New York, which will be published in a while, when I
said that it was not the obvious thing to get out of
being a physicist. Ewing was also a physicist. get
out of being a physicist and go into a sideline of
this sort, and particularly Earth Sciences was at
a very low ebb. The Earth Sciences had got
themselves into a rut. The essential trouble was
that they had no global theories. The global
theories they had clearly didn't work and they'd
become disreputable. If you talk to any geologist
about how things worked, what the mechanisms of
mountain formation were, what the driving forces
of geology were, they would be quite uninterested
and hostile. Because all efforts at explanation
had not got anywhere, and they'd come to believe
that the progress of the science was in going to a
smaller and smaller scale, You got a PhD by
examining a few square miles of whales or
something of this sort. And this had become so dull
that they weren't getting bright people. And the
subject was slowly dying. And what happened to
both Ewing and myself was that we were driven
largely by economic necessity. And partly my
emotional feelings, I think that something a
little in the open air, something a little more
large scale, a little more connected with human
interests than nuclear physics, was maybe our
thing. I mean, I wouldn't have voluntarily have
left physics, I don't think, but I had an idea that
maybe I'd have fun with it, with the different
things. And also, of course, there's something to
be said for being a large fish in a small pond. So
anyway, I made this transition in the middle of my
PhD period and started off in this impoverished
apartment, there was this man named Cunningham,
And there was a really good man, Harold Jeffries,
who was a loner, a theoretical physicist. He
started as a botanist, actually, and then came to
Cambridge and did mathematics. And he was a
theoretical physicist, a man who had great
difficulty in explaining himself verbally, a
very bad lecturer. And he was nominally a member of
the department, but he never turned up, actually.
I mean, I never saw him. we had one or two in the
department, it was one or two rooms, and I really
never saw him there. But he became, after a year or
so, he became attached to me and to my wife. He was a
lonely man who had made many attempts to get
married unsuccessfully to very unsuitable
women. He used to ask girls from the theatrical
companies that visited Cambridge, always two at a
time, to come to tea with him. And it must have been a
joke, I think, among the touring companies of
England, because they always came, apparently.
These rather elegant young women would come and
have tea with Harold Jeffreys. And his rooms were
very odd. He lived in college, and his rooms, he had
deck chairs. I don't quite know why, in his rooms.